

Spring WebMvc Is an abstraction of the HTTP protocol given for java users.
The rest API exposed with spring webmvc is not conformed with the JAXRS standard.

Two main dependencies: spring webmvc and spring webflow (which is the reactive counterpart of spring mvc)
Spring MVC is based on the Model view controller architectureal pattern, which provides an architecture made in three decouplred components (each one of them can be changed without affecting the others):

* view: the user interface, it show visuallt the model, and passes requests to the controller.
* controller: calls the business components and the DB eventually
* model: is the format of the data exchanged between the controller and the view.

Spring MVC exposes an entry point for the application which is the DispatcherServlet (it dispatches requests to the handlers mapped to them) that acts as the front controller of the web application. The spring application context  is injected into the DispatcherServlet automatically before any request is made. The spring webapp can run on any application server (it's enough to tell it to listen over the dispatcher servlet) or run embedded in spring boot (which has his own tomcat instance integrated)

The _dispatcherServlet_ is reacting to the HTTP requests sent to the controller which are handling the requests and return with a model, then the dispatcher servlet renders a view with the model and returns it as an HTTP response to the client.
Spring provides:
_Handler mappings_, maps requests to _handler adapters_ which in turn map to the controller methods, _view resolvers_ identify the view that will be rendered, _exception resolvers_ are special methods that handle exceptions, personalization beans for internationalization and theming.
The developers only provides the configuration and the _controllers_ which implement the logic associated to endpoints.

The dispatcher servlet must be defined either in the web.xml for old-style WAR application, or in a spring configuration class that extends the _AbstractDispatcherServletInitializer_, at bootstrap this will create the _WebApplicationContext_ (instead of the standard _ApplicationContext_)

**CONTROLLERS**
Annotate the class with controller and the method with RequestMapping or its children annotations. (you can also add request mapping at class level to set the prefix common to all the methods).
In the traditional way of generating the views on server side with technologies like tymeleaf or JSP, a classic controller is taking the Model as input and returning a string identifying a view (thanks to the viewResolver, the string becames a path).
```
@Controller  //you need to pick up the controllers using component scanning like the other @Component
public class PersonController {
    @GetMapping("{id}")
    public String show(@PathVariable(), Long id, Model model) { 
    //in the PathVariable, specify the param name if it's different then the one in the rquest
        return "persons/showOne/" + id;
    }
}
```

* The controller can also take query param as input: _@RequestParam("name") String param_;
* You can also pass an header to the method: _@RequestHeader("name") String param_;
* More generally you can add a parameter of type _ServletRequest_, _WebRequest_ (or any other of the family) and have any detail of the request.
* You can also add an input parameter representing the response so that you can enrich it with whatever you want, by using an input parameter of type _ServletResponse._
* You can also add an _HttpSession_ type of parameter that automatically enforces that the session exists (it's not null)
* You can add an input of type _HttpMethod_ to access to the Http method used, for auditing for example
* You can add a param of type _Reader_, to read the raw text content of the body of the request.
* You can annotate a param with _@MatrixVeriable_ which maps to the key value pairs in the request: _<http://localhost/persons;g=1;u=3>,_ you can use this to map to a single value like int g, or to a map of type _<String, Something>._ But you need extra configuration if you want spring to consider matrix params:

```
//in a config class implementing the WebMvcConfigurer

@Override
public void configurePath(PathMatchConfigurer configurer) {
    UrlPatHelper matrixPathHelper = new UrlPathHelper();
    matrixPathHelper.setRemoveSemicolonContent(false);
    configurer.setUrlPathHelper(matrixPathHelper);
}


```

* You can provide a param annotated with _@CookieValue_ to access cookies.
* You can provide a method of type RedirectAttributes and use it to add attributes so that another controller that is reacting to the redirection can access it using an input param annotated with: _@ModelAttribute("nameof the attribute") List<String> attributeValue_:

```
@GetMapping("/redirection")
public String redirect(RedirectAttributes redicrectAttributes) {
    redirectAttributes.addFlashAttribute("data", Collections.singletonList("the data is here"));
    return "redirect:/home/target";
}

@GetMapping("/target")
public String target(@ModelAttribute("data") List<String> data) {
    //....
}
```

* you can annotate the controller method with _@ResponseStatus_ to indicate the status returned:
	* 1xx: informational response
	* 2xx: success response
	* 3xx: redirection
	* 4xx: client error
	* 5xx: server error

**VIEW**

By default the string returned by the controller is interpreted as a path to a view in JSP, but controllers can also return concrete object that are then serialized to XML or JSON in the response (REST API). Views are beans instantiated by the view resolver, the view resolver is another bean responsible of mapping the result of the controllers to a path to the specific view. You can set multiple view resolvers and order them by priority:
```
@Bean
public ViewResolver xlsViewResolver() {
    BeanNameViewResolver resolver = new BeanNameVireResolver();
    resolver.setOrder(0);  //set to top priority
    return resolver;
}

@Bean
public ViewResolver jspViewResolver() {
    InternalResourceViewResolver resolver = new ...;
    resolver.setPrefix("/WEB-INF/");
    resolver.setSuffix(".jsp");
    resolver.setOrder(1);
    return resolver;
}
```
Spring is trying over the list of resolver ordered by priority, until a valid view is obtained, if none is obtained a the end -> _ServletException_.
When you want to support multiple types of views you should use **content negotiation**:

* use distinct users for distinct views
* use a parametrized URL (query param with the type)
* use the _Accept_ HTTP header to set the resource type (not possible when the client is a browser since the browser force its value to _text/htm_l)

and then you need to configure the _ContentNegotiatingViewResolver_ bean and all of its dependencies (not covered here).

The simplest to use viewResolver is the _UrlBasedViewResolver_ that is the super class of the others, it doesn't require any mapping and using it requires that the controllers returns directly the path leading to the view file (path relative to the _webapp_ directory, where the statics are in a classic WAR project),
it also supports redirects and forward.
A redirect is a another URL call, it can be hosted in another server or another context, it can be a different app. A forward call is internal to the application, you can redirect from one JSP to another for example.

**CONFIGURATION**
You can integrate the spring app (and his dispatcher servlet) inside a classic web application, packaged as WAR, and configured with the _webapp/WEB-INF/web.xml_

To do that you must add the following to the web.xml (inside the webapp tag)
```
<servlet>
    <servlet-name>my-dispatcher</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>org.springframework.web.servlet.DispatcherServlet</servlet-class>  // this is fixed
    <init-param>
        <param-name>contextConfigLocation</param-name>
        <param-value>/WEB-INF/spring/spring-web.xml</param.value>  //path to spring config relative to webapp folder
    </init-param>
    <load-on-startup>1</load-on-startup>
</servlet>
<servlet-mapping>  //maps requests to this spring dispatcher
    <servlet-name>my-dispatcher</servlet-name>
    <url-pattern>/</url-pattern>
</servlet-mapping>
```

This file points to sprng-web.xml which should be a spring configuration file containing the declaration of the viewResolver bean.

element which registers by default all the infrastructure beans needed for a web application. They introduced also <mvc:default-servelt-handler/> that creates a static resource handler with max priority over the other request handlers (so that when the client requests a resource directly, like a pdf, it is returned immediately without the lag of searching any controller that can map to the request before searching for the static file), with those elements, the spring-web.xml becomes:
```
<beans //xml namespaces are declared here...>
```
    <mvc:default-servlet-handler>
</beans>

From spring 3.1 we don't need the spring XML config anymore, but we can configure with java
``` 
@Configuration
@EnableWebMvc  //corresponds to ?<mvc:annotation-driven/>
@ComponentScan(...)
public class WebConfig implements WebMvcConfigurer {  //either WebMvcConfigurer or WebMvcConfigurerAdapter

    @Override  //this corresponds to <mvc:default-servlet-handler/>
    public void configureDefaultServletHandling(DefaultServletConfigurer configurer) {
        configurer.enable();
    }

    @Bean
    public ViewResolver jspViewResolver() {
        InternalResourceViewResolver resolver = new ...;
        resolver.setPrefix("/WEB-INF/");
        resolver.setSuffix(".jsp");
        resolver.setOrder(1);
        return resolver;
    }
}
```

Also the web.xml can be replaced by java configuration implementing _WebApplicationInitializer (_or subclasses_)_
_IMPORTANT:_ this is not a configuration class for spring, so don't annotate it
```
public class WebInitializer implements WebApplicationInitializer {
    @Override
    public void onStartup(ServletContext servletContext) throws ServletException {
        ServletRegistration.Dynamic registration = servletContext.addServlet("my-dispatcher", new DispatcherServlet());
        registration.setLoadOnStartup(1);
        registration.addMapping("/");
        registration.setInitParamter("contextConfigLocation", "com.example.config.WebConfig");  //the web config class
        registration.setInitParameter("contextClass", "org.springframework.web.servlet.support.AnnotationConfigWebApplicationContext");
    }
}

//another example implementing the AbstractAnnotationConfigDispatcherServletInitializer
class WebInitializer extends AbstractAnnotationConfigDispatcherServletInitializer {
    @Override
    protected Class<?>[] getRootConfigClasses() {
        return new Class[]{H2DbConfig.class, ServiceConfig.class};
    }
    @Override
    protected Class<?>[] getServletConfigClasses() {
        return new Class[]{WebConfig.class};
    }
    @Override
    protected String[] getServletMappings() {
        return new String[]{"/"};
    }
    @Override
    protected Filter[] getServletFilters() {
        CharacterEncodingFilter cef = new CharacterEncodingFilter();
        cef.setEncoding("UTF-8");
        cef.setForceEncoding(true);
        return new Filter[]{new HiddenHttpMethodFilter(), cef};
    }

    @Override
    protected DispatcherServlet createDispatcherServlet(WebApplicationContext servletAppContext) {
        final DispatcherServlet dispatcherServlet = (DispatcherServlet) super.createDispatcherServlet(servletAppContext);
        dispatcherServlet.setThrowExceptionIfNoHandlerFound(true);
        return dispatcherServlet;
    }
}


```

To deploy a built WAR application to tomcat you need to copy the war into the _tomcat/webapps_ folder and restart the server, the application will be deployed at _localhost:8080/war\_name/_.

**EXCEPTION HANDLING**
Spring has different implementations of the _HandlerExceptionResolver_ to resolve exceptions:

* _ExceptionHandlerExceptionResolver_: calls a defined _@ExceptionHandler_ method inside a _@Controller_ or _@ControllerAdvice_
* _ResponseStatusExceptionResolver_ calls defined methods associated with @ResponseStatus having the same status code as the one in the exception
* _DefaultHandlerExceptionResolver_: default mapping from any spring exception to his status code

To add your error view in case of missing endpoint fired:

* configure the _DispatcherServlet_ in the _WebInitializer_

```
@Override
public void customizeRegistration(ServletRegistration.Dynamic registration) {
    registration.setInitParameter("throwExceptionIfNoHandlerFound", "true");
}
```

* create your implementation of the _HandlerExceptionResolver_

```
public class MissingExcpetionResolver implements HandlerExceptionResolver {
    @Override
    protected ModelAndView doResolveException(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response, Object handler, Exception ex) {
        if (ex instanceof NoHandlerFoundException) { // the spring exception
            response.setStatus(HttpStatus.NOT_FOUND.value());
            return new ModelAndView("error");    // return a ModelAndVire that points to an error view
        }
        return null;    // in case this is not the exception that we are treating return null, so that other handlers can be invoked
    }
}
```

* add your custom _HandlerExceptionResolver_ as a bean in a config (with highest precedence to avoid wasting time if something is wrong):

```
@Bean
HandlerExceptionResolver missingMappingExcpetionResolver() {
    MissingExcpetionResolver resolver = new MissingExcpetionResolver();
    resolver.setOrder(Ordered.HIGHEST_PRECEDENCE);
    return resolver;
}
```

In the business logic is a good practice to define your custom exception and for each exception create an exception handler method:
```
//inside a Controller or ControllerAdvice

@ExceptionHandler
public ModelAndView notFound(NotFoundCustomException e) {
    return new ModelAndView("error", e.getMessage());  // or whatever error handling
}
```
this is still a handler method so everything said before applies (all the parameters usable in input)
It's a good practice to keep these exception handlers separated from the other handlers, and you should declare all the exception handlers in a @ControllerAdvice annotated class.

The integration test is not supported for the web layer in spring (but you can do it in spring-boot).

**SPRING BOOT**
use the _spring-boot-starter-web_ dependency, it automatically incorporates an embedded tomcat inside the application, the web app will be ready without config, but you can config it in the _application.yml:_
```
server:
    port: 8081
    servlet:
        context-path: /
    compression:
        enabled: true
    address: 0.0.0.0
```
All the statics and templates and internationalization resources now are under the _resources_ folder directly (there no need for a _webapp/WEB-INF_ anymore, since the application itself have a tomcat server inside). You need also a boot application annotated with _@SpringBootApplication_.

The code for Controllers, Entities, Repository and Services is the same as the one for a standard spring application.

**INTEGRATION TEST**
for a full integration test, the usual _@SpringBootTest and @AutoConfigureMockMvc_ will do (you need also an autowired mockMvc to perform the web requests).
An alternative for a full integration using only _@SpringBootTest_ doesn't need _MockMvc_ and uses the _RESTAssured_ library to perform the requests.

In order to integrate test only the web layer you need to use:
_@WebMvcTest_ and then mock the service bean using the mockito annotation: _@MockBean_ (the test will create an autoconfiguration with controllers, controllerAdvices, but not servics or repositories).
```
@WebMvcTest(controllers = {PersonController.class})  // the lsit of controllers involved
public class TestPersonController {

    MockMvc mockMvc;                // object used to perform web requests

    @MockBean
    PersonService personService;    //mock the service

    @Autowired
    WebApplicationContext context;  //inject the context

    @BeforeEach
    void setUp() {
        mockMvc = MockMvcBuilders.webApplicationContextSetup(context).build();  //build the mockMvc starting from the context
    }

    @Test
    public void testMethod() {
        mockMvc.perform(get("/person")).andExpect(...);
    }
}
```

**SPRING BOOT DATA REST**
Spring boot is automatically generating the endpoints and the controllers thanks to the _spring-boot-started-data-rest_ dependency
it can be configured as well in classic spring

HATEOAS is an additional feature on top of spring boot which is adding automatically links over the autogenerated controllers, the links are other endpoints that matches the data linked to the data that you searched in the actual endpoint that you targeted.

You can configure the spring data rest api generated, directly over the repository classes:
```
@RepositoryRestResource (path="newPath")  // at class level
```
You can also disable some method (avoid the endpoint creation):
```
@RestResource(exported = false)  //at method level
```

**REST**
Remoting and webServices are two ways of communicate between applications, which can run on different computer and can be written in different languages. In remoting the applications communicating know about each other, each app have a configuration with the location of the other which ensures security, it is also stateful. Rmoting relies on a common language of runtime assemblies, because the types are sent by value or **by reference**.(they work at low level making them hard to work with firewalls). Web services are cross-platform communication methods that use common standards (no problem with firewalls), they send messages instead of object and references, and they are generally stateless. (ex: SOAP)

REST (Representational state transfer) is an HTTP based web service for communication between applications. With rest we exchange textual representations of web resources using a predefined set of stateless operations. It is handy because it maps HTTP protocol operations to CRUD operations in DB.
REST can also be described as an architecture style for designing distributed applications where simple HTTP is used to communicate.

* GET is a read, it's safe and idempotent
* POST is a creation, it's not safe nor idempotent.
* PUT is an update, its' not safe and it's idempotent.
* DELETE is a deletion, it's not safe and it can be considered idempotent

**URIs** identify resources univoquely by the HTTP method and the path. While the **representation** (in JSON or XML) of the objects transferred is moving inside the body of the requests/responses.

ADVANTAGES OF REST:

* simple
* widely supported
* resources ca n be represented in a variety of formats
* you can use HTTP proxies and cache to handle high loads
* reduces client/server coupling
* browser directly interpret representations
* it allows communication between application written in different languages
* thank's to the statelessness, multiple servers can handle the same API without the need to update their state in a distributed manner
* thank's to the standard of requests, little to no documentation is needed
* rest doesn't need specific libraries, only a network connection.

REST is natively supported by spring already in the webmvc package. The only difference from before being that we have to tell the DispatcherServlet that the thing returned by the controller is not a reference to a view but the representation of the required resource, we do this by putting:
```
@Controller
@ResponseBody

//or equivalently
@RestController
```
at class/method level in the controller. (generally it is at class level if you handle only REST endpoint in the controller, at method level otherwise)

Another update needed to include rest in a spring application is telling spring how to convert the objects sent and received to textual representation in the body of the HTTP messages.
Spring has different implementations of the HttpMessageConverter<T> interface that are meant to do this job:

* StringHttpMessageConverter: basic convertions of the message to a string object.
* MappingJackson2HttpMessageConverter: maps to application/\* + JSON, need Jackson in the classpath
* MappingJackson2XmlHttpMessageConverter: maps to application/\* + XML, only if Jackson is prensent in the classpath.
* AtomFeedHttpMessageConverter: converts to application/atom + xml, needs rome in the classpath
* RssChannelHttpMessageConverter: application/rss + xml, needs rome in the classpath

Spring automatically declares the proper bean based on the dependency in the classpath, so you just need to configure the mapper of the string to object in order to configure rest on top of a spring web app:
```
@Bean
public ObjectMapper objectMapper() {
    ObjectMapper mapper = new ObjectMapper();
    mapper.enable(SerializationFeature.INDENT_OUTPUT);
    mapper.setSerializationInclusion(JsonInclude.Include.NON_NULL);
    return mapper;
}
```

This serializes well of the primary values in a default way, if we want to override the default serialization technique we need to use the @JsonFormat annotation over the field in every entity class. In particular you need to add an extra dependency named jackson-datatype-jsr310 and then in the code:
```
// in the objectMapper configuration you must enable extra modules (like the one we imported)
@Bean
public ObjectMapper objectMapper() {
    ...

    objectMapper.findAndRegisterModules();
    return mapper;
}

//in the entity class

@JsonFormat(shape = JsonFormat.Shape.STRING, pattern = DateProcessor.DATE_FORMAT) 
//telling jackson that a date should be a plain string with a certain format
@DateTimeFormat(DateProcessor.DATE_FORMAT)
private LocalDateTime createdAt;
```

You can avoid to serialize or deserialize a property by using @JsonIgnore, or you can make a filed write only (useful for password setting) like this:
```
  @JsonProperty( value = "password", access = JsonProperty.Access.WRITE_ONLY)
```

In rest is a good prectice to also reduct the format of body accepted, if you are working with JSON for example, your controllers should be limited to it:
```
@GetMapping(value = "/list", produces = MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)  // the get body is generally limited to 255 bytes
//or
@PostMapping(value = "/list", consumes = MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
```

When using REST we don't need views and so we don't need theming and internationalization on server side since we deal with representation. But we still need the dispatcher servlet, that's why we still import the **webmvc** module.

In the controller methods you can add the _@ResponseStatus_ annotation including the expected status of the response, here is a refresher on HTTP statuses:

* 200:OK (used for GET)
* 201:CREATED (used for POST)
* 204:NO CONTENT (used for normal PUT and DELETE)
* 404:NOT FOUND (when the data modified or retrieved is not found, also the data that is parent of the one that is about to be created by a post)
* 403:FORBIDDEN
* 405:METHOD NOT ALLOWED
* 409:CONFLICT (used for put or post trying to save data that is existing and marked as unique)
* 415: UNSOPPORTED MEDIA TYPE (the body of the request is in a non supported format)

You can add an automatic check on validation of a request body with _@Validated_, for example:
```
@PostMapping
public Person create(@Validated(Person.BasicValidation.class) @RequestBody Person person, BindingResult result) {
    if (result.hasErrors()) ...
}

// the validated checks the validation placed over the Person entity
@Entity
public class Person {
    interface BasicValidation {}  // create an empty interface representing a validation group

    @NotNull(groups = BasicValidation.class)                      //validation check
    @Size(min = 3, max = 30, groups = BasicValidation.class)    //validation check
    @NotEmpty(groups = BasicValidation.class)                    //validation check
    private String username;
}
```

**REST ERROR HANDLING**
When handling errors, the error handler are a good choice as for spring mvc, but we can also specify the response status and return empty http status codes as responses:
```
@ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.NOT_FOUND)
@ExceptionHandler({NotFoundException.class})
public void handleNotFound(NotFoundException e) {
    return new ResponseEntity<>(ex.getMessage(), HttpStatus.BAD_REQUEST); 
    //response entity allow you to create a response controlling any aspect of it
}
```
it's still a best practice to define your own custom exceptions.

**REST IN SPRING BOOT**
In order to support rest you don't need any config, but just the dependency _spring-boot-starter-web_.

**TESTING REST**
_RestTemplate_ is a powerful class that can create a synchronous client to perform HTTP requests
In order to test in full integration a spring boot app with _restTemplate_:
```
@SpringBootTest
class AppTest {
    private static RestTemplate restTemplate;

    @BeforeAll
    static void init() {
        restTemplate = new RestTemplate();
    }

    @Test
    public testGet() {
        Person person = restTemplate.execute(
            "http://localhost/persons/{id}",
            HttpMethod.GET,
            null,
            new HttpMessageConverterExtractor<>(Person.class, restTemplate.getMessageConverters())),
            new HashMap<String, Long>() {{put("id", 1L);}}
        )
        assertNotNull(person);
    }
}
```
other useful restTemplate methods:

* getForObject(url, Person.class)    GET
* postForLocation(url, new HttpEntity<>(personObject, headers), Person.class)  POST
* exchange(user, HttpMethod.PUT, new HttpEntity<>(personObject, headers), Person.class)    PUT
* delete(url)    DELETE

you can use restTeomplate also in a standard spring application but you need to start the application before (since you don't have the _springboottest_ annotation) and then you need to manually start the test after the application is up.
